## October 16, 2018
1. Announcements
2. Review [Course Calendar Demo Part 2](../Tutorials/CourseCatalogDemo/Readme.md)
3. [Intro to NumPy](../Slides/L5_NumPy_Arrays.slides.html)
4. Classwork
   - Complete Part 3 of the [HealthStats Project](https://github.com/christopherhuntley/ba505-docs/tree/master/Tutorials/HealthStatsProject). Do not continue on to Part 4 until next class. 
   - Collaborate on a Practice Problem Notebook with a few classmates:
      - Create a new Python 3 Notebook in Jupyter Lab for "Python Practice." Better yet, put it in a new Git repository so you can publish it on GitHub.  
      - Pick some problems from [here](https://www.w3resource.com/python-exercises/) that seem relevant. They are organized into categories to make it pretty simple. 
      - Copy each problem into a separate Markdown cell. Then use code cells to program the answers. 
      - Best yet ... Compare your work with your classmates to see who can answer the most/hardest ones. All it takes is a quick `git commit` and `git push` to GitHub.
5. Homework
   - Complete the DataCamp "NumPy" (Due tonight!)
   - Continue DataCamp "Cleaning Data in Python" course (due Oct 30)
   - Study for Quiz 3, which covers **everything** up to October 2:
      - Program Structure (libraries, modules, functions, classes, variables, etc.)
      - Control Structures (blocks, loops, conditionals)
      - Data Structures (lists, tuples, strings, dictionaries, files/streams)
      - Coding Conventions (comments, module organization, etc.)
      - Markdown/Jupyter/Git/GitHub usage
      - Reading and **Writing** short snippets of Python to do basic data management tasks like reading from a file, working with standard data structures (lists, list of lists, lists of dictionaries, etc.), manipulating strings and numbers, implementing accumulators with `for` loops and list/dict comprehensions, etc. 
   - **Practice, practice, practice** by completing your self-selecting programming problems. Don't forget to commit and push your notebooks so you can collaborate with your classmates.
       
  